---
layout: post
title: "Mesh"
subtitle: "Scaffolding Comparison Tables for Online Decision Making"
seotitle: "Mesh: Scaffolding Comparison Tables for Online Decision Making"
authors: "Joseph Chee Chang, Nathan Hahn, Aniket Kittur."
venue: "ACM UIST 2020"
stats: "(r=21.6% N=450)"
date: 2020-10-20 08:00
comments: true
toc: true
lsi: true
categories: ['UIST', 'HCI', 'Sensemaking', 'Search', 'Information Retrieval', 'Interaction']
span: 12
project: true
img: "/images/projects/mesh.png"
imgStyleIndex: 'width: 50%; float: right; margin-left: 28px; border: 1px solid lightgray;'
imgStylePost: 'width: 80%; margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; margin-top: 28px; border: 1px solid lightgray;'

---

Consumers can choose from many different products and base their decisions on
the tens of thousands of online evidence about each of their options.  However,
to synthesize this information into confident decisions can incur high
interaction and cognitive costs. Online information is scattered across
different sources, and evidence such as reviews can be subjective and
conflicting, requiring users to interpret them under their personal context. We
introduce Mesh, which scaffolds users in iteratively building up a better
understanding of both their choices by evaluating evidence gathered across
sources. Lab and field deployment studies found that Mesh significantly reduces
the costs of gathering and evaluating evidence and scaffolds decision-making
through personalized criteria enabling users to gain deeper insights from data
to make confident purchase decisions.



<!--more-->

Abstract
----------------------
While there is an enormous amount of information online for making decisions
such as choosing a product, restaurant, or school, it can be costly for users
to synthesize that information into confident decisions. Information for users'
many different criteria needs to be gathered from many different sources into a
structure where they can be compared and contrasted. The usefulness of each
criterion for differentiating potential options can be opaque to users, and
evidence such as reviews may be subjective and conflicting, requiring users to
interpret each under their personal context. We introduce Mesh, which
scaffolds users in iteratively building up a better understanding of both their
criteria and options by evaluating evidence gathered across sources in the
context of consumer decision making. Mesh bridges the gap between decision
support systems that typically have rigid structures and the fluid and dynamic
process of exploratory search, changing the cost structure to provide
increasing payoffs with greater user investment. Our lab and field deployment
studies found evidence that Mesh significantly reduces the costs of
gathering and evaluating evidence and scaffolds decision-making through
personalized criteria enabling users to gain deeper insights from data.


Video Figure
----------------------
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/NqriHlTfVhU?rel=0" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>


Download
----------------------
<a class="btn btn-default" href="/images/papers/mesh.pdf" target='_blank' onclick="_gaq.push(['_trackEvent', 'Paper', 'Mesh', 'PDF']);" role="button">PDF Download</a>
<a class="btn btn-default" href="#" target='_blank' onclick="_gaq.push(['_trackEvent', 'Paper', 'Mesh', 'ACM']);"  role="button">ACM Digital Library (coming soon..)</a>


Citation
----------------------
```
Mesh: Scaffolding Comparison Tables for Online Decision Making.
Joseph Chee Chang, Nathan Hahn, Aniket Kittur.
In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM User Interface Software and Technology Symposium: UIST 2020.
```

Bibtex
----------------------
```
@article{chang2020mesh,
  title={Mesh: Scaffolding Comparison Tables for Online Decision Making},
  author={Chang, Joseph Chee and Hahn, Nathan, and Kittur, Aniket},
  booktitle = {Proceedings of the 33rd ACM User Interface Software and Technology Symposium},
  series = {UIST'20},
  year={2020}
}
```
